[MUSIC]
Okay, so now let's discuss how to find
the gradient with respect
to the parameters phi.
So here's our objective, and
we want to differentiate it.
And again, let's rewrite
the definition of the expected value
as an integral of probability
times logarithm as the function.
And again, we can move the expected
value inside the summation,
it will not change anything,
and also inside the integral.
Again, if the functions are smooth and
nice then we can swap integration and
differentiation signs.
However, in contrast to
the case in our previous video,
we cannot put the differentiation
sign here inside the,
so to push it forward near the logarithm.
Well, first of all, because
the gradient of logarithm of p of x Is
zero because it doesn't depend on phi,
so the gradient is zero.
And so the right-hand side of
this expression is just zero,
and it's obviously not what
the left-hand side is.
And the reason why we can't do that is
because the q itself dependent on phi.
So we have to find this
gradient of q respect to phi.
And if we do that,
then the problem here is that we no
longer have an expected value.
So if you look at the first
equation this slide,
it is sum of integrals of gradient
of q times logarithm of p.
And this thing is not an expected value
with respect to any distribution.
So you can't approximate
it with Monte Carlo,
you can't sample from some distribution,
and
then use the samples to approximate it,
because there are no distribution here.
Here is just gradient for distribution,
which is not a distribution, and
a logarithm of a distribution,
which is also not a distribution.
So we can't approximate this
thing with Monte Carlo.
And how can we do it, how can we
approximate this gradient with something?
Well, one thing we can
do is the following.
We can artificially add
some distribution inside.
So we can multiply and
divide by some distribution q.
And then we can treat this
q as the probabilities.
And then the gradient of q times
log p divided by q is the function
which we're computing
the expected value of.
Or if you simplify this
expression a little bit,
we can say that the gradient of
q divided by q is just gradient
gradient of logarithm of q by the
definition of the gradient of logarithm.
And then we can rewrite
this formula as follows.
So it's an integral of
q times the gradient of
logarithm of q times logarithm of p,
right?
So it's just exact formula, we didn't lose
anything on some kind of approximation.
And now we can say that this last
expression is an expect value with
respect to q.
It's an expected value for this gradient
of logarithm of q times logarithm of p.
And this sometimes called log-derivative
trick, and works for any distribution.
So it allows you to differentiate
some expected value,
even if the gradient of this expected
value is not an expected value itself.
So now you have an expected value again,
and you can sample from the q,
and then approximate this
gradient with Monte Carlo.
It's a valid approach, and until recently
people used it, and so it kind of worked.
But the problem here is that actually
this expected value is a correct value.
So it's an exact expression,
we didn't lose anything.
But if you try to approximate
this thing with Monte Carlo,
we'll get a really loose approximation.
Because the variance of that will be high,
and we'll have to sample lots and
lots and
lots of points to get an approximation for
gradient that is at least
a little bit accurate.
And the reason for that is because,
we have this logarithm of p of x.
And when we start our training,
this p of x is as low as possible, right?
because p of x is a distribution
over natural images, and
has to assign some
distribution to any image.
And so at the start, when we don't
know anything about our data,
any image is really improbable
according to our model.
So logarithm of this probability may
be like -1 million or something.
So the model at the beginning doesn't
get used to this training data.
So it thinks that these training
images are really, really improbable.
And this means that we are finding
an expected value of something,
times -1 million.
And then because the gradients
of the first term,
the gradient of logarithm of q
can be positive or negative,
then we do Monte Carlo,
and average a few samples.
We'll get like -1 million plus
900,000 minus 1,100,000 and etc.
So we'll get really, really high
values in the absolute values, but
they will be of different signs.
And on others, they will be true,
they will be around, I don't know, 100.
And this is exact value for
the gradient in this case, for example.
But the variance will be so
high that you will have to use lots and
lots of gradients to approximate
this thing accurately.
And note that we didn't have this
problem in the previous video,
because instead of logarithm of p,
we had a gradient of logarithm of p.
And even if logarithm of p
is really like -1 million,
then the gradient of that will
probably not be that large.
So this is a problem,
and in the next video,
we'll talk about one nice solution to
this problem in this particular case.
So how can we estimate this gradient
with a small variance estimate?
[MUSIC]